Now that we've gone through the process
of collecting the right data for
the clustering process, we need to
check to ensure that we have data
types that will fit with
clustering algorithm.
So in order to do the math behind
the algorithm, continuous or
ordinal variables are needed.
If you don't remember what those are,
there's a link in the instructor
notes that might be helpful.
What that means is that variables with
data types that are categorical, or
even date fields need to be
transformed to be used in clustering.
Some date fields can be converted
almost naturally without much thought.
For example, a birthdate or
a store opening date can be
easily converted to a numeric age field,
or a years opened field.
Other date fields might require a little
more thought before you can use them.
For example, if you have
a seasonal kind of date field,
where the value is really
more about the time of year.
It may make more sense to calculate the
median of the dates and then transform
the date variable to be a number of
days before or after that median date.
We'll explore this more
in an exercise later.
Categorical data becomes even
a bit tougher to include.
If the category actually does relate
to something that is numeric, for
example, a size of something,
as in small, medium, and large.
Then it might make sense to assign
a number to each of these in
the order they occur.
This gets us an ordinal data type that
can be used in a clustering algorithm.
However, if you have a variable
that describes eye color,
how do you measure the distance
between blue, green and brown?
You can't just arbitrarily assign
numbers to each, where blue is 1 and
green is 2 and brown is 3.
because the clustering algorithm will
think that blue is closer to green
than it is to brown.
There are some algorithms
that try to accommodate for
categorical data in clustering.
We will not cover these in this class.
But you can find a few links
in the instructor notes
that explore this
particular type of data.